Luke HEATONa
, Boguslaw OBARAb,c
, Vincente GRAUb,c,d
, Nick JONESa,e
, Mario H. Felix PhD
Toshiyuki NAKAGAKIf
, Lynne BODDYg
, Mark D. FRICKERh,
*
a
Physics Department, Clarendon Laboratory, University of Oxford, Parks Road, Oxford OX1 3PU, UK
b
Oxford e-Research Centre, University of Oxford, 7 Keble Road, Oxford OX1 3QG, UK
c
Oxford Centre for Integrative Systems Biology, University of Oxford, South Parks Road, Oxford OX1 3QU, UK
d
Institute for Biomedical Engineering, University of Oxford, Headington, Oxford OX3 7DQ, UK
e
Department of Mathematics, Imperial College London, SW7 2AZ, UK
f
Department of Intelligent and Complex systems, Hakodate Future University, 116-2 Kamedanakano-cho, Hakodate, Hokkaido, Japan
g
Cardiff School of Biosciences, Cardiff University, Cardiff CF10 3US, UK
h
Department of Plant Sciences, University of Oxford, South Parks Road, Oxford OX1 3RB, UK
article info
Article history:
Received 4 February 2012
Accepted 7 February 2012
Keywords:
Fungal network
Mass-flow modelling
Mycophagous invertebrate grazing
Network resilience
Nutrient translocation
Transport network
abstract
Mycelial fungi grow as indeterminate adaptive networks that have to forage for scarce
resources in a patchy and unpredictable environment under constant onslaught from
mycophagous animals. Development of contrast-independent network extraction algorithms has dramatically improved our ability to characterise these dynamic macroscopic
networks and promises to bridge the gap between experiments in realistic experimental
microcosms and graph-theoretic network analysis, greatly facilitating quantitative
description of their complex behaviour. Furthermore, using digitised networks as inputs,
empirically-based minimal biophysical mass-flow models already provide a high degree
of explanation for patterns of long-distance radiolabel movement, and hint at global
control mechanisms emerging naturally as a consequence of the intrinsic hydraulic
connectivity. Network resilience is also critical to survival and can be explored both in silico
by removing links in the digitised networks according to particular rules, or in vivo by allowing different mycophagous invertebrates to graze on the networks. Survival depends
on both the intrinsic architecture adopted by each species and the ability to reconnect
following damage. It is hoped that a comparative approach may yield useful insights
into not just fungal ecology, but also biologically inspired rules governing the combinatorial
trade-off between cost, transport efficiency, resilience and control complexity for selforganised adaptive networks in other domains.
ª 2012 The British Mycological Society. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
1. Network development in mycelial fungi
Mycelial fungi and plasmodial slime moulds (myxomycetes)
form elaborate interconnected networks that are highly
responsive to local environmental conditions. Unlike other
biological transport networks such as plant or animal vascular
systems, the network formed by these organisms is not part of
the organism, it is the organism. These networks develop as
* Corresponding author.
E-mail address: mark.fricker@plants.ox.ac.uk (M. D. Fricker).
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/fbr
fungal biology reviews 26 (2012) 12 e2 9
1749-4613/$ e see front matter ª 2012 The British Mycological Society. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.fbr.2012.02.001
the organism forages for new resources in a patchy resource
environment and must both transport nutrients between
spatially separated source and sink regions, and also maintain
the network integrity in the face of predation or random
damage (Selosse et al., 2006; Bebber et al., 2007b; Boddy and
Jones, 2007; Fricker et al., 2008a, 2009; Boddy et al., 2009). Filamentous fungi grow by apical extension of slender hyphae
that then branch apically or sub-apically (Harris, 2008) to
form a fractal, tree-like mycelium (Boddy and Donnelly,
2008). Ascomycetes have septa with pores which allow cytoplasmic continuity and organelle movement across the intact
mycelium (Lew, 2011), but which can be quickly blocked by
Woronin bodies or organelles following damage (Jedd, 2011).
Likewise, septa in basidiomycetes are perforated by a central
pore so the cytosol can flow between adjacent cells, but the
dolipore structure prevents nuclear movement. Extensions
of the ER forming the septal pore cap (SPC) can cover the
pore to restrict leakage following damage (Jedd, 2011). The
combination of tip growth and branching allows fungi to
explore complex physical environments using a range of efficient, but species-specific space searching algorithms
(Hanson et al., 2006; Held et al., 2011). In ascomycetes and
basidiomycetes, tangential hyphal fusions or anastomoses
occur behind the colony margin to form an interconnected
microscopic mycelial network (Rayner et al., 1994, 1999; Read
et al., 2009, 2010).
In the larger, more persistent saprotrophic and ectomycorrhizal basidiomycetes that are able to grow out into soil from
colonised food sources, the network architecture develops
further with the formation of specialised high-conductivity
organs, termed cords or rhizomorphs (Cairney, 1992, 2005).
The extent to which mature cords have a clear structure varies
between species, but the internal anatomy has similar
features across the basidiomycetes (Rayner et al., 1985;
Cairney, 1992). The central inner medulla contains numerous
rigid, hollow vessel hyphae with diameters from 10 to 15 mm
and few septal pores that form a pathway for translocation
(Cairney, 1992, 2005). In contrast, the outer medulla contains
loosely packed hyphae which may be as little as 2 mm wide.
Cords are covered by an outer rind that inhibits exchange
of water and solutes. As some regions of the mycelium expand
and mature, other regions regress (Fig. 1), and the process
of autophagy appears to be critical to enable fungi to
forage effectively through recycling redundant material to
support new growth (Olsson, 2001; Falconer et al., 2005, 2007;
Fricker et al., 2007). This is particularly noticeable when new
resources are encountered; cords interconnecting resources
thicken, whilst mycelium emanating in other directions
Fig. 1 e Development of Phallus impudicus growing from 2 3 2 3 1 cm beech wood block inocula across the surface of
non-sterile soil at 18 C at the times indicated. Initial colony growth forms a densely cross-linked network. Further
expansion is fuelled in part by recycling of redundant material, eventually thinning out to a minimal skeleton as the
resource is consumed. Scale bar [ 2 cm. Images courtesy of AD A’Bear.
Analysis of fungal networks 13
from the original resource regresses, to an extent depending
on the species and the relative sizes of the old and new
resources (Boddy, 1999; Fricker et al., 2008b). The corded
systems resulting from these different processes form visible
networks interconnecting food resources on a scale of centimetres in laboratory microcosms to metres in undisturbed
woodland (Fricker et al., 2008a). Indeed, mycelial fungi form
the most extensive biological networks so far characterised,
popularly known as the Wood Wide Web (Smith et al., 1992;
Simard and Durall, 2004; Southworth et al., 2005; Selosse
et al., 2006; Lamour et al., 2007; Whitfield, 2007; Boddy and
Donnelly, 2008; Beiler et al., 2010; Simard et al., 2012).
2. Visualisation of network structure and
network extraction
Early measures of macroscopic mycelial organisation focussed
on fractal dimension as a useful tool to capture aspects of the
network structure as a metric (Boddy and Donnelly, 2008).
However, such a single summary statistic only expresses
a small fraction of the characteristics of the mycelial architecture. Tools from graph theory allow more detailed characterisation of the network structure and dynamics further and
allow exploration of the underlying mechanism leading to
network optimisation (see Section 3). This approach needs all
branching points and linking cords to be digitised which,
because of the large number of interconnections, requires
(semi-)automated network extraction techniques.
Semi-automated image processing approaches that
extract networks have been developed for mycelium grown on
substrates, such as cellophane (Crawford et al., 1993; Hitchcock
et al., 1996; Ritz et al., 1996), or nitrocellulose (Barry et al., 2009)
to facilitate acquisition of high-contrast images. The subsequent
processing procedure typically involves noise reduction, using
median or band-pass filters, intensity-based thresholding,
with manual or automated threshold selection, followed by
morphological processing to achieve an improved skeletonisation of the colony structure e.g. (Tucker et al., 1992; Barry et al.,
2009; Barry and Williams, 2011). However, these methods
require rather specific culture conditions far removed from
those of the natural environment, and illumination regimes
that cannot readily be adapted for macroscopic networks grown
in soil microcosms. Using the latter is crucial to explore the
natural behavioural capability of these organisms and the full
range of their ecological responses (Boddy, 1999). In addition,
cords are multi-hyphal aggregates and show considerable variation in contrast as the individual cords span several orders of
magnitude in diameter from mm to mm within a single colony,
and have to be segmented from the background of compressed
soil which is non-homogeneous in texture and reflectivity. To
date, delineation of the network architecture from the larger
soil-based systems has only been possibly manually (Bebber
et al., 2007a; Fricker et al., 2007; Lamour et al., 2007; Rotheray
et al., 2008; Boddy et al., 2010). As a result, the total number of
macroscopic fungal networks analysed so far is relatively low.
Recently, Obara et al. (2012, in press, submitted for
publication) developed a high-throughput automated image
analysis approach to detect and characterise large complex
fungal networks grown under realistic conditions. The first
step in segmenting network structures is often to use matched
filters based on the spatial properties of the object to locate its
position from the ridges and ravines in the image intensity.
The shape of the matched filter are often based on the second
derivative of a Gaussian through the calculation of the local
Hessian matrix. To detect features at different orientations,
the filter is often rotated through a reasonable set of angles
and the maximum response from the filter bank is calculated.
In general, a tensor representation of an image, such as the
Hessian, gives information about how much the image varies
along and orthogonal to the dominant orientations within
a certain neighbourhood (Knutsson et al., 2011). Inclusion of
different weightings for the orthogonal directions and intensity components give measures such as vesselness (Frangi
et al., 1998) or neuriteness (Meijering et al., 2004), that have
been used to improve network-specific feature enhancement.
While tensor representations can be built on purely
intensity-based filters, these are sensitive to changes in absolute
intensity and image contrast. To reduce this problem, methods
based on local phase have been proposed as a contrastindependent alternative to detect edges (Kovesi, 1999). Salient
features have similar values of local phase when observed at
different scales, thus phase congruency values are high in the
direction perpendicular to the cords, while they remain close
to zero in the direction parallel to the cords. More importantly,
the values of phase congruency are minimally affected by
contrast changes. Thus the phase congruency tensor (PCT) can
be used to improve significantly on intensity-based tensors to
give PCT-vesselness or PCT-neuriteness enhancement algorithms (Obara et al., 2012, in press).
Following the selective enhancement arising from the PCT
approach (e.g. Fig. 2), the network can be segmented rapidly
using a watershed transform. Normally the basins in the
watershed image represent the objects of interest. However,
in the case of fungal networks the watershed boundaries
themselves delineate ridges in the image that correspond to
the network branches of interest, and also guarantee extraction of a fully-connected network as they form closed loops.
The resulting skeleton is then pruned on the basis of local
cost functions that incorporate both intensity and tensor
direction information (Fig. 2). A graph representation of the
network is constructed from the pruned skeleton with link
weights based on the Euclidean lengths and the link diameter
derived from sampling the local intensity, with appropriate
calibration, to give each link a weight that depends on its
length (l ) and cross-sectional area (a). Each cord is modelled
as a cylinder packed with identical hyphae, rather than
a single tube that increases in diameter, although the internal
structure of cords can be much more complex (Rayner et al.,
1985). This approach provides a rapid, robust and extremely
effective means to extract fungal networks with up to 106 links
from even low-contrast, noisy images compared to <104 links
possible with manual digitisation (Obara et al., submitted for
publication) (Fig. 2).
3. Characterisation of the network
Networks extracted using image analysis are strictly
a subsample of the full network. The improved image analysis
14 L. Heaton et al.
techniques described above yield more complete sampling of
the network architecture down to the level of relatively minor
cords, but still cannot resolve individual fine hyphae. It is
know that topological properties of networks and their
samples can differ (Stumpf et al., 2005). There are geometrical
reasons to expect that subsamples of planar graphs will
inherit more of the properties of the full graph, nevertheless
potential sampling issues still have to be borne in mind
when considering the results described below.
The network topology is defined by classifying junctions
(branch points, anastomoses and the food sources) as nodes,
and the cords between nodes as links. In general, during
foraging the number of nodes, number of links and the total
material in the network, increase through time. However, the
local scale network evolution is also characterised by selective
loss of connections and thinning out of the fine mycelium and
weaker cords (Fig. 1). Thus, fungal networks progress from
a radial branching tree to a weakly connected lattice-like
network behind the growing margin, through a process of
fusion and reinforcement to form loops, and selective removal
and recycling of redundant material (Bebber et al., 2007a).
This shift can be quantified by the alpha coefficient (a) or
meshedness (Haggett and Chorley, 1969; Buhl et al., 2004),
that gives the number of closed loops or cycles present as a fraction of the maximum possible for a planar network with the
same number of nodes, according to Euler’s polyhedral
formula (e.g. Barthelemy, 2010). The alpha coefficient
measured for Phanerochaete velutina tends to increase from
near 0, as expected for a branching tree, to around 10e20 % as
systems become more cross-connected, depending on the
resource environment (Bebber et al., 2007a). There is considerable variation in the values of a for different species, with
values generally matching the observed qualitative level of
cross-linking. However, this measure, like many other graphtheoretic network metrics, can be heavily skewed by parts of
the network that are perhaps less relevant when considering
the macroscopic architecture. Thus, the extent and level of
detail from the peripheral growing region or fine mycelium
that is included in the analysis can affect a. Nevertheless,
values of a for fungi are similar to those for networks of tunnels
in ant galleries (Buhl et al., 2004), Physarum polycephalum (Bebber, Nakagaki and Fricker, unpublished observations) and
street networks in cities (Cardillo et al., 2006), suggesting that
addition of up to 20 % of the maximum number of cross-links
into a planar network maybe sufficient to achieve desirable
network properties in a range of different scenarios.
Other topological network measures have not proved to be
very informative for mycelia as they are heavily constrained
by the developmental process and crowding effects restricting
the maximum number of connections possible in a planar
network (Hitchcock et al., 1996; Barrat et al., 2005; Bebber
et al., 2007a; Fricker et al., 2007; Lamour et al., 2007). Thus,
the possible degree (k, Table 1) of each node is limited to 1
for tips, 3 for branch points or fusion, or occasionally 4 for
initially overlapping cords that then fuse. Likewise, the
mean clustering coefficient, C, is of limited relevance for
fungal networks, as their growth habit effectively precludes
formation of triads. The frequency distribution of node
strength (Table 1) shows more diversity than node degree
alone, and follows an approximately log-normal distribution
for P. velutina networks (Bebber et al., 2007a). However, we
have not found evidence for power law relationships that
have attracted so much attention in analyses of nonbiological networks.
Fig. 2 e Automated network extraction from a colony of Phallus impudicus grown on compressed soil from a wood-block
inoculum after 20 d. (a) Extracted network and the source of food overlaid on the input image with the centre line (red),
branching points (green), endpoints (blue), and food source boundary (magenta). (b) Network with w106 links pseudo-colour
coded for cord thickness. Scale bar corresponds to 2 cm.
Analysis of fungal networks 15
4. Predicted transport characteristics of the
mycelial network
As fungal networks are embedded in Euclidean space, it is
straightforward to measure the Euclidean distance between
the nodes and compare it with the shortest path through
the network between two nodes to give a route factor
(Gastner and Newman, 2006a). Good distribution networks
should be efficient in the sense that the paths from each
node to the centre ought to be relatively short and the sum
of the lengths of all links in the network should be low, so
that the network is economical to build and maintain. These
two criteria are often at odds with each other, extra links may
be needed to reduce the route factor for some given node.
Nevertheless, Gastner and Newman (2006b) have shown
that there are solutions to the distribution problem that
come remarkably close to being optimal in both senses. Interestingly, these theoretically optimal networks bear striking
visual similarity to fungal networks in the absence of anastomoses (Fig. 3).
In general, it is important to consider the weights of links
when considering transport efficiency. In most transport
networks, the flux through a given link reflects the diameter
of the pathway as well as just its length used in the calculation
of the route factor, as longer, thinner cords have greater resistance to flow. In this case the diameter of a network can be
kept small regardless of the number of nodes that need to be
connected, or the Euclidean distance between them, as it is
always possible to increase the weight of some transport
backbone to provide a ‘short’ route from one side of the
network to the other (Barrat et al., 2005; Barthelemy, 2010).
Indeed, much of the literature on optimal transport networks
is concerned with the optimal distribution of weights for
a given cost function (Murray, 1926; Sherman, 1981; Maritan
et al., 1996; West et al., 1997; Rinaldo et al., 2004; Durand,
2006, 2007; Bohn and Magnasco, 2007; Bernot et al., 2008;
Corson, 2010; Dodds, 2010; Katifori et al., 2010).
An overall measure of transport is the average network
efficiency (E ), defined as the mean of the reciprocal of shortest
path lengths for transport through the network (Latora and
Marchiori, 2001, 2003). In isolation, E is not useful without
some frame of reference. However, it is not straightforward
to generate suitable reference models to test the extent that
differential cord weighting improves the performance of the
network. At present there are no suitable algorithms available
to generate weighted planar networks with properties that
mimic fungal networks, although some progress has been
made with models of related systems such as leaf veination
networks (Katifori et al., 2010; Katifori and Magnasco, 2011).
In other areas of network theory, comparisons are typically
made with a reference network produced by random rewiring
of the links or randomly reassigning the weights to different
links. However, neither approach gives an intuitively satisfying model to test performance against, as they have no biological basis. We have previously used a two stage procedure
to evaluate the performance of the fungal networks (Bebber
et al., 2007a). In the first step, the Euclidean fungal network,
based on link length alone, is compared with model networks
constructed using well defined neighbourhood graphs,
Fig. 3 e Theoretical optimal network structures that
minimise route factor and total length. Networks can be
close to optimal in terms of both route factor and total
length. In Gastner and Newman’s model (Gastner and
Newman, 2006a) nodes are randomly distributed in two
dimensional space with unit mean density, and node 0 is
designated as the root or source for the network. The
network grows over time, and at each time step a new link
is added, connecting a previously unconnected node i to
some node j that was already part of the network. The
nodes i and j are chosen such that at each time step the cost
dij D blj0 is minimised, where dij is the Euclidean distance
between i and j, lj0 is length through the network from node
j to the source node 0, and b is a tunable parameter. When
b [ 0, the shortest possible link is added at every time step.
The resulting network will have the smallest possible mean
link length l, but it is likely that the mean route factor q will
be large. By increasing b the network no longer grows by
adding the shortest possible link, but the resulting
networks have route factors which are remarkably close to 1
(the minimum possible). Each data point on the graph
represents an example with 10,000 nodes, and the inset
shows an example network with b [ 0.4. From Gastner and
Newman (2006a) with permission.
Table 1 e Definition of some network terms used
Topology
measure
Definition
Node Branch points, fusions or tips
Link Connection between two nodes
Node degree The number of links attached to a node
Clustering
coefficient
A measure of the number of loops of
length 3 (i.e. a triangle). Values between 0 and 1
Node strength A measure of the importance of a node,
determined by summing the weight
of all links connected to the node
Link weight A measure reflecting the size (e.g. length,
cross-section area) or some other property
relative to other links
16 L. Heaton et al.
including the minimum spanning tree (MST) as a lower bound
for a low cost but vulnerable network, and the Delaunay triangulation (DT), giving an upper bound for a well-connected,
robust, but expensive network (Buhl et al., 2004; Cardillo
et al., 2006; Gastner and Newman, 2006b). In the second step
of analysis, the effect of including a fixed amount of material
in the network, equivalent to the total material in the real
network, was examined. Thus, each link in the ‘uniform’
fungal and model networks was allocated a constant weight,
such that the total construction cost was the same to explore
the consequences for transport if the fungus had allocated the
same amount of resource evenly over the existing or model
networks. This also allowed comparison with the real, differentially weighted network as the network measures were in
comparable units.
The real weighted networks had much shorter physiological paths, especially in the central region, than their corresponding uniform networks (Bebber et al., 2007a). More
surprisingly, the weighted fungal network efficiency was
greater than the uniform DT and the uniform MST when
the predicted transport from just the inoculum (root) to all
other nodes was considered. Although very well connected,
the DT performed poorly, as distributing material across the
large number of links present gave each one low crosssectional area and consequent high resistance. Conversely,
the MST performed better than the DT as it was populated
with few, but extremely thick, links. The uniform fungal
networks were similar in performance to the MST, although
they clearly have a different architecture, but the fully
weighted fungal network showed the best predicted transport behaviour. Thus, differential weighting of links in the
real network gave a >4 fold improvement in local efficiency
in comparison to a fully connected uniform network constructed with the same total cost (Bebber et al., 2007a). The
ability of fungal networks to modify link strengths in
a dynamic way is therefore crucial to achieve a high transport capacity.
Subtle shifts in the predicted transport performance of
the network as it grows can be identified by which links
are carrying the greatest number of shortest paths and
have a high shortest-path betweenness centrality (SPBC)
(Latora and Marchiori, 2007). The relative importance of
particular links between the inoculum and added resource,
as judged by their SPBC, fluctuates in the early stage of
growth with several cords competing before one thickens
up sufficiently to achieve dominance (Fricker et al., 2008b,
2009). Equally, one of the disadvantages of using shortest
path analysis is that comparable parallel pathways that are
only marginally longer do not feature in the analysis, but
might be expected to participate in transport in a real
system. This highlights one of the major problems with
using shortest path based summary statistics. Shortest
path metrics such as diameter, efficiency, or SPBC, are relatively easy to compute, and in each case there is a unique
solution. However, such measures may be misleading, as
in actual transport networks material moves along parallel
flow paths, and not all of the material follows the shortest
path. It is therefore important to make sure the theoretical
analyses mirror the actual transport processes occurring
within the fungal network itself.
5. Biological observations of network transport
Many species of fungi forage in heterogeneous environments
where they have to grow through nutrient deficient regions to
discover new resources and therefore require some kind of
transport process to move the resources needed for growth
from the source of nutrients, to the growing margin. Whilst
direct uptake and intra-hyphal nutrient diffusion may be
sufficient to sustain short-range local growth when resources
are abundant (Olsson, 2001), long-distance translocation is
required to deliver nutrients at a sufficient rate to growing
tips, particularly in fungi that grow out extensively from
organic resources and are therefore too large to distribute
nutrients through diffusion alone (Wells and Boddy, 1995;
Wells et al., 1995; Davidson and Olsson, 2000; Boswell et al.,
2002, 2003, 2007). Remarkably little is known about the mechanism(s) underpinning such long-distance nutrient translocation, but the mechanisms proposed include vesicles moved by
motor proteins (Steinberg, 2007), contractile elements
(Jennings, 1987), diffusion through the vacuole system
(Darrah et al., 2006), carefully regulated osmotic gradients
(Jennings, 1987; Cairney, 1992) and mass flows, discussed in
detail below. There is also increasing evidence that a wide
range of macromolecules can be translocated within the
mycelium, including quantum dots (Whiteside et al., 2009)
and proteins (Woolston et al., 2011). Conversely, water films
on the surface of the network itself provide a highway for
movement of bacteria, effectively bridging gaps between soil
particles (Kohlmeier et al., 2005; Wick et al., 2010).
At the microscopic scale GFP tagged proteins, chemical
stains and quantum dots (Jennings, 1987; Cairney, 1992; Lew,
2005; Whiteside et al., 2009) suggest that hyphae contain
both mass flow of fluid, and active transport mechanisms.
For example, there is evidence that motor proteins and the
cytoskeleton play a role in nuclear migration and positioning
(Suelmann and Fischer, 2000), but live imaging of growing
hyphae also indicates that mass flow of the cytoplasm is the
dominant factor driving nuclear translocation (Lew, 2005;
Ramos-Garcia et al., 2009). Additional direct evidence for
mass flows within apical hyphae is through injection of oil
droplets using a pressure probe to observe flow of the cytoplasm (Lew, 2005). These inert droplets move at the same
rate (w0.2 mm s1
) as the other contents of the hyphae, indicating that a mass flow of fluid is responsible for much of
the observed motion, rather than motor proteins interacting
with the cytoskeleton or other specific molecular interactions.
At a larger scale, radio-labelled carbon and phosphate have
been observed to move over distances and time scales that
cannot be explained by diffusion alone (Jennings, 1987;
Cairney, 1992; Wells and Boddy, 1995; Wells et al., 1995;
Olsson and Gray, 1998; Lindahl et al., 2001; Fricker et al.,
2008b). For example, velocities in the range 4.4e9.8 mm s1
have been measured in Armillaria mellea (Jennings, 1987;
Cairney, 1992), and velocities as large as 5569 mm s1 have
been measured in Serpula lacrymans (Jennings, 1987; Cairney,
1992). The extent of connectivity within the network has
been demonstrated for rhizomorphs of Armillaria (Lamour
et al., 2007), but it is more difficult to establish whether the
network can behave as a single contiguous entity for other
Analysis of fungal networks 17
species. In addition, it is clear that the fungi have the potential
for sophisticated control of routing through regulated occlusion of septal pores (Jedd, 2011).
6. Modelling mass flows
We infer that mass flow (advection) is likely to be an important, if not the dominant, long-distance transport mechanism
in larger network forming fungi. However, mass flow in fungi
does not follow the paradigm for either plant or animal
vascular systems. Plants drive mass flows in the xylem by
transpiration from the leaves in an open system. They
also actively maintain osmotic gradients along the phloem,
inducing a flow of sap from sources, where water is drawn
from the surrounding tissue into the sieve-tubes of the
phloem, to sinks, where water leaves the phloem. Animals
use hearts or contractile regions to circulate blood through
hierarchical, fractal-like vascular systems that form a closed
system (Sherman, 1981). In fungi, cords tend to be insulated
from the environment by hydrophobic coatings and mass
flow can only take place when water is able to exit the translocation pathway through either localised exudation (e.g. Serpula lacrymans), evaporation, or by growth itself. As fungal
colonies form integrated hydraulic systems, the increase in
volume that results from hyphal growth requires an equivalent uptake of water, or a reduction in the volume of another
part of the mycelium that leads to growth-induced mass
flow (e.g. Fig. 4; Heaton et al., 2010). This latter phenomenon
is particularly significant in experimental microcosms which
are run at high humidity thus restricting the potential for
any transpirational mass flows.
With the advent of a fully digitised time-series of weighted
networks (Bebber et al., 2007b; Fricker et al., 2007, 2008b, 2009;
Rotheray et al., 2008; Boddy et al., 2010) it is possible to
calculate the magnitude of growth-induced mass flow for
individual colonies (Heaton et al., 2010). In essence, the
empirically-determined weighted network is recast as an electrical circuit analogue, with conductances dependent on the
cross-sectional area of the cords and inversely related to their
length. The total current flowing through the network is estimated from change in the volume of all the cords in the
network arising from thickening or thinning, or through new
growth, between two time points (Fig. 4b). With the simplifying assumptions that the volume change represents water
movement, the inoculum is the source of water (although
the model accommodates uptake anywhere), and the flows
minimise the work required to overcome viscous drag, the
current flowing through every link can be calculated (Fig. 5;
Heaton et al., 2010). If the total cross-sectional area of the
growing front is much larger than the cross-sectional area of
the supporting mycelium, our analysis suggests that because
of the (effective) incompressibility of aqueous fluids, growth
itself can drive mass flows which translocate resources
towards the growing front at velocities that are much greater
than the velocity of tip growth. The predicted distribution of
velocities was heavy tailed, with many links carrying low
velocity mass flows, and a few links carrying high velocity
mass flows. Nevertheless, the velocities predicted for the
major cords were in reasonable agreement with experimental
data for radiolabel transport, and the pressure gradients
needed to produce these flows are small. Furthermore, cords
that were predicted to carry fast-moving or large currents
were significantly more likely to increase in size than cords
with slow-moving or small currents (Heaton et al., 2010).
We do not yet have methods to measure water movement
directly in these networks. However, we can image nutrient
movement by mapping the distribution of the amino-acid
analogue, 14C-amino isobutyrate (14C-AIB) using photoncounting scintillation imaging (Tlalka et al., 2002, 2007, 2008). 14C-AIB accumulates in the free amino acid pool and is not
metabolised in a range of woodland fungi so far examined, as
judged by the lack of incorporation of 14C in other metabolites
or released as 14CO2, (Watkinson, 1984; Olsson and Gray,
1998). This allows it to be used as a proxy for nitrogen translocation (Watkinson, 1984) and provides an opportunity to
compare the predictions made by the theoretical network analysis to the actual pattern of nutrient movement in the
same microcosms (Fricker et al., 2008c, 2009; Heaton et al.,
submitted for publication). This requires a significant extension
Fig. 4 e Physical principles of growth-induced mass flow.
(a) Turgor pressure is induced by an osmotic gradient at the
site of water uptake. Vesicles (circles) have to deliver material
to the tip and must move towards the tip faster than it grows,
while the cytosol behind the growing tip moves forward at
the rate of tip growth (Lew, 2005). Conservation of volume
dictates that as the tip expands, fluid flows towards the tips
from the site of water uptake creating a mass flow.
(b) Suppose that a fungus grows out of an inoculum (square)
and into a region (oval). Some of the material that becomes
part of the fungi may come from within the oval region. The
rest of the material must have travelled along the cords
(links) that cross the region’s boundary. If the volume of fungi
within the region increases by DV over a period of time t, and
none of the material is drawn from within the region, it
follows that the average current flowing into the region is
DV/t. Furthermore, if the total cross-sectional area of the
boundary crossing cords is a, the mean velocity of flow will
be DV/at (Heaton et al., 2010).
18 L. Heaton et al.
of the growth-induced mass flow model to incorporate the fate
of a nutrient loaded into the transport pathway which will also
become dispersed by diffusion (Lew, 2011), and potentially
taken out of the pathway during transit to maintain the
network itself (Heaton et al., submitted for publication).
The predictions made by such an Advection-DiffusionDelivery (ADD) model provide an extraordinarily high level
of explanatory power for the measured distribution of
14C-AIB in networks of P. velutina (Fig. 6; Heaton et al.,
submitted for publication). This is a marked improvement
over our previous analysis of 14C-AIB distribution patterns
based on the static network architecture or shortest-path
betweenness centrality, which only showed correlation in
regions of the network where transport actually occurred
(Fricker et al., 2008b, 2009). The ADD model suggests that the
minimum currents consistent with the observed growth
Fig. 5 e Network development and predicted currents in Phanerochaete velutina based on a growth-induced mass flow model.
Images (aec) show network development after 19 d, 25 d and 32 d respectively. The image intensity of cords was used to
estimate their thickness, enabling the production of weighted, digitised networks (def). These are colour coded to show the
estimated thicknesses of all sections of all links, while the white block represents the inoculum. Images (gei) are colour
coded according to the total volume that has passed through each cord, as calculated from a growth-induced mass flow
model (Heaton et al., 2010).
Analysis of fungal networks 19
would effectively transport resource from the inoculum to the
growing tips over the timescale of growth. Nevertheless,
whilst advective mass flows carry resource over long
distances from the inoculum out towards the growing tips
(Jennings, 1987; Cairney, 1992; Olsson and Gray, 1998), diffusion and active transport mechanisms may be essential near
the sites where the cell wall is expanding. This follows
because the cytosol within the apical hyphae moves forward
at the same rate as the growing tips (Lew, 2005), but to transport resource from the base of these hyphae to the growing
tips, the resource has to move faster than the rate of growth.
7. Biophysical consequences of mass flows
The incompressibility of the fluids within fungi ensures that
there is a rapid global response to local fluid movements.
Furthermore, the velocity of fluid flow is a local signal that
can convey quasi-global information about the role of a cord
within the mycelium. There was a correlation between the
thickening of cords and the speeds or flux densities predicted
by the ADD model (Heaton et al., submitted for publication).
Similarly, there was a positive correlation between predicted
current and the thickening of cords. This is consistent with
the plausible assumption that P. velutina has evolved to reduce
the work needed to overcome viscous drag, as significantly
greater energy savings can be made by preferentially thickening the high current cords. The speeds predicted by the
ADD model are consistent with experimental data. For
example, a radio-labelled source of carbon has been measured
moving at a velocity 7 mm s1 away from the inoculum. This is
the same order of magnitude that the ADD model predicts for
a major cord. The pressure gradients required to produce the
predicted flows are very modest and unlike previous analyses
(Jennings, 1987; Rayner, 1991; Lew et al., 2004), it was suggested
that intrahyphal concentration gradients are not strictly
necessary for the production of mass flows.
In other vascular systems with nutrient distribution
involving mass flows, a local adaptive response to wall shear
stress is a key mechanism that enables the optimisation of
the network (Kamiya et al., 1984; Pries et al., 2009). Flow velocities are of the order 1001000 mm s1 in these systems and
induce wall shear stresses of the order 0.1e1 Nm2
. Flows in
fungi are much lower than this, nevertheless, the wall shear
stress will be greater in the septal pores, because at that point
the same current that is passing through the hyphae or transport vessels must pass through a smaller channel, which
means the local velocity of flow must be greater. If the mass
Fig. 6 e Measured and predicted patterns of 14C-AIB distribution in networks of Phanerochaete velutina. (a) Mycelial network of
Phanerochaete velutina, photographed just before 14C-AIB was added to the inoculum. (b) Photon-counting scintillation image
of 14C-AIB distribution integrated over 32 h. The brightness of the image reflects the total number of photons emitted from
each region. (c) Measurement of 14C-AIB label from (b) using a superimposed manually digitised network, coloured to
indicate the photon count. Links that were not covered by the scintillation screen are coloured black. (d) Predicted 14C-AIB
intensity from the ADD model (Heaton et al., submitted for publication), with the assumption that AIB enters the network at
the inoculum at a constant rate, each link in the final network continues to grow (or shrink) at the same rate that was
observed over the final time step, and 10 % of each cord is occupied by transport vessels. (e) Predicted intensity under the
same assumptions as (d), except that in this case 20 % of each cord is assumed to be occupied by transport vessels.
20 L. Heaton et al.
flows also pass through the much smaller vessels that are
found within cords, or if the shear wall stress is detected at
the septal pores, fungi could plausibly detect velocities of
the order 10 mm s1
. It is less likely that fungi can detect the
difference between currents with a mean velocity much
smaller than this, as the corresponding changes in wall shear
stress would be very small, even in the vessels whose diameter is only 2 mm.
As well as experiencing wall shear stress, the vessels
within pressure driven vascular systems also experience
intramural stress. This force per unit area is experienced
throughout the vessel wall (and not just on the inside surface),
as the vessel must resist the tendency to expand or burst.
Hyphae and transport vessels are subject to several atmospheres of pressure (about 4e5 bar) (Money, 1990, 1997; Lew
et al., 2004; Lew, 2005, 2011; Money, 2008) and the fluids within
these structures flow at a very modest rate (Wells et al., 1995;
Olsson and Gray, 1998; Tlalka et al., 2002, 2008; Lew, 2005;
Fricker et al., 2008b). Consequently, the intramural stress will
be orders of magnitude greater than the shear wall stress.
Nevertheless, this does not mean that it is implausible that
fungi are sensitive to changes in wall shear stress. The cell
wall must be rigid enough to withstand the intramural stress
(Money, 1997, 2008; Harold, 2002; Lew, 2011), but proteins
embedded in the lipid membranes of tethered organelles, or
in the septal pores (where the velocity of flow and the wall
shear stress will be greatest) may be sensitive to the scale of
flows within a fungal network.
The curvature of vessels can have important effects on the
fluid flows within them (Truskey et al., 2010), particularly if
flow rates are high, the vessel is large and the radius of curvature tight. Whilst this is an important issue for the major
curved arteries of the human vascular system, in the case of
fungal networks we estimate the effect of curvature on fluid
flows is negligible.
The importance of localising water uptake
The efficiency of growth-induced mass flows as a means of
transport requires that water uptake and growth are spatially
separated. If water uptake occurs throughout the network,
growth-induced mass flows will still occur, but the scale of
advection will be significantly reduced (Fig. 7). For example,
in a linear network, switching from water uptake at one end
to water uptake throughout the link will halve the scale of
mass-flow. In the case of a branching network the reduction
in advection can be much greater. For example, if water
uptake occurs throughout a branching network of unit
cross-sectional area the velocity of mass flow would equal
the velocity of tip growth v in every link, regardless of its
generation (Fig. 7). This contrasts dramatically with the case
where all the water uptake occurs at the inoculum. In the
case where there are n generations in the tree and the link
in question is part of generation i, the mean velocity is v2ni
rather than v (Fig. 7).
The ADD model also helps to explain previously challenging experimental observations, most notably, the occurrence of sudden route switching (Fricker et al., 2008b), now
interpreted as a change in relative distal growth, and the
colony-wide coupling of polarised transport and growth
arrest at sites remote from encounter with a new food
resource (Tlalka et al., 2008). As growth, mass-flow and
nutrient transport are coupled, there may be an interesting
interaction between nutrient availability, control of branching and nutrient transport. It is well known that the rate of
hyphal branching increases when tips encounter resource
rich environments (Boswell et al., 2003, 2007; Falconer et al.,
2005; Tlalka et al., 2008) which will give an increase in flux
density in this region. If the rate of input from the inoculum
remains similar, there has to be a concomitant reduction in
fluxes elsewhere, in line with experimental observations
(Tlalka et al., 2008).
By contrast, it is difficult to reconcile growth-induced mass
flows, which might be expected to be directed apically, with
observations of bi-directional radiolabel movement (Lindahl
et al., 2001; Tlalka et al., 2007, 2008). At the growing margin,
one of the potential roles of the tubular vacuolar system
may be to provide an alternative pathway from the cytoplasm
to allow basally directed diffusive transport of acquired
solutes (Darrah et al., 2006). In regions more distal from the
tip, bi-directional movement might involve establishing an
anti-parallel circulation system within individual cords
(Fricker et al., 2007). However, there is currently no direct
evidence for such a system and it is still challenging to
conceive how such loops would be able to re-configure themselves as the network architecture is remodelled.
Fig. 7 e Velocities in a branching network with different patterns of water uptake. (a) If water uptake only occurs in the first
link, the velocity of mass flow halves from one generation to the next. (b) If water uptake occurs evenly throughout the
network, the velocity may be constant throughout.
Analysis of fungal networks 21
8. Network robustness
High transport capacity and low construction cost could have
come at the expense of other network properties, such as
robustness to damage, as there is no a priori reason why link
weight allocation for one feature necessarily enhances
another. Robustness to damage from physical breakage or
grazing by invertebrates (Harold et al., 2005; Bretherton et al.,
2006; Wood et al., 2006; Boddy and Jones, 2007), is of major
significance to long-lived mycelial systems.
This can be appreciated by examining the effects of
breaking links in models of the fungal networks and assessing
the impact on transport or overall connectivity (Bebber et al.,
2007a; Lamour et al., 2007; Rotheray et al., 2008; Boddy et al.,
2010). We note that cords (links) are the biologically relevant
target for attack rather than nodes in non-biological systems.
In natural systems, which links are broken depends on the
agent causing damage.With invertebrate grazing, for example,
different species graze in different ways: collembolan often
target fine mycelium, millipedes graze arcs at growing fronts,
and woodlice often devour mycelium in long straight paths
(Crowther et al., 2011a, b, c, in press). These different grazing
patterns have not yet been mimicked in artificial experiments
on digitised networks in silico. Rather, links have been broken
at random or by targeting critical connections (Fig. 8; Lamour
et al., 2007), or in an order assuming that the probability of
breakage increased with length and decreased with the thickness of the link (Bebber et al., 2007a). Robustness was measured
by the size of the connected components remaining or the
transport efficiency, and compared to standard networks
such as the DT or MST (e.g. Fig. 8; Bebber et al., 2007a; Lamour
et al., 2007). Having a large number of alternate pathways is
important in this context, and the differential strengthening
of links not only imparts high transport capacity but also
robustness to damage (Bebber et al., 2007a).
A static analysis of the network represents a minimum
estimate of the real network resilience in nature, as the
network is also able to respond to local damage, by modification of adjacent link strength, and to regrow and reconnect.
Thus, for example, local mechanical damage to a small region
of the network promotes strengthening of distal circumferential connections (Fricker et al., 2009), whilst continuous
collembolan grazing trims the network back to the reinforced
core (Fig. 9; Rotheray et al., 2008; Boddy et al., 2010), in support
of the in silico predictions, but also promotes an increase in
tangential connections making the network more resilient,
at the cost of a reduction in exploration (Fricker et al., 2007,
2009; Rotheray et al., 2008; Boddy et al., 2010). Since different
species have different mycelial architecture, not surprisingly
they have different resilience to damage depending on the
extent of connectivity. In general, a high degree of connectivity confers greater resilience, but this comes at an increased
cost in terms of more material in the network or a reduction in
exploratory growth (e.g. Fig. 9).
9. Comparison with transport networks in
other domains
The challenges that balancing the competing demands of cost,
efficiency, resilience and control complexity place on the
Fig. 8 e Rhizomorph network of Armillaria lutea growing over an area of 25 m2 in a Pinus nigra plantation. (a) A manually
extracted planar graph in which the 107 vertices (nodes) and 169 edges (links) have been numbered. (b) The minimal
spanning tree for the same node positions as (a).
Disruption of two critical links (78 or 81) would lead to large parts (13 % and 11 %) being disconnected from the remainder of
the mapped network. However, there is a low probability that amputation of a randomly chosen link would separate the
network into two disconnected components. The high level of connectedness may enhance redistribution of nutrients and
provide a robust rhizomorph structure, allowing Armillaria to respond opportunistically to spatially and temporally changing
environments. From Lamour et al. (2007) with permission.
22 L. Heaton et al.
network organisation have strong parallels with those faced
in the design of anthropogenic infrastructure networks. We
note, however, that the fluidic character of fungal networks
makes them unusual since it allows information to spread
across the system on very fast timescales. The solutions that
fungi achieve may represent good compromises to such
a combinatorial optimisation problem, and may yield useful
insights into the design of delocalised, robust infrastructure
networks that operate without central control. This presumes
that solutions adopted by biological networks will exemplify
useful generic theoretical principles, such as persistence,
robustness, error-handling or appropriate redundancy, as
they have been honed by evolution. The expectation is that
the process of Darwinian natural selection based on variation,
competition and survival has explored a significant range of
possible network organisations and the resulting systems
are likely to be well-adapted to survive and reproduce under
particular biotic and abiotic conditions to solve certain ecological problems (Fricker et al., 2009). A range of network architectures, development and dynamics can be found within the
fungi and myxomycetes, suggesting a comparative approach
may be instructive. However, the constraints imposed by the
components used to construct the network (i.e. branching
tubes) may have a profound effect on the possible network
organisation and dynamics, so that any result can only be
generalised to a very limited set of real-world problems.
Fig. 9 e Link evolution in colonies of Phanerochaete velutina in response to grazing. Mycelial systems of P. velutina grown from
beech wood blocks in trays (57 3 57 cm) of compressed non-sterile soil. For display, images were processed by background
subtraction, contrast limited histogram equalisation, contrast stretching and look-up table inversion to give black-on-white
representations of the colony morphology. Superimposed pseudo-colour display of the evolution of each link in networks
with new resources added at 36 d (R) for three replicate ungrazed colonies (aec) and three colonies with grazing Collembola
added at 49 d (def). Link evolution was calculated as the ratio between the sum of the differences in link diameter between
successive time-points and the maximum difference over the whole time period. Continuous growth is indicated by red,
continuous regression of cords by blue and cords that remain constant throughout are indicated by green. The position
of Perspex lid supports are indicated by dotted outlines. I [ inoculum, scale bar [ 10 cm. From Boddy et al. (2010) with
permission.
Analysis of fungal networks 23
Transport costs and optimal transport networks
The design of optimal distribution networks for water, electricity, telephone signals, etc is of great practical import in
urban planning, and consequently aspects of this family of
problems have been studied since antiquity. Over the last
15 y, a string of papers has explored the topic of transport
networks that are optimal in some given sense. Some authors
have pursued highly abstract models which assess the cost of
different ways of connecting source nodes to sinks (with
a variety ways of assessing the cost of any given pattern of
flow) (Maritan et al., 1996; Banavar et al., 2000a, b, 2002, 2010;
Dreyer, 2001; Dreyer and Puzio, 2001; Bohn and Magnasco,
2007; Bernot et al., 2008; Corson, 2010; Dodds, 2010),
others have focussed on the general properties of networks
with flows driven by potential differences (Sherman, 1981;
Durand, 2006, 2007; Katifori et al., 2010), while West and
colleagues consider the optimum network given a number of
biologically inspired assumptions (West et al., 1997, 1999a,
2002; West and Brown, 2004; Savage et al., 2008). The papers
by Banavar and West are particularly notable, as they played
a key role in the development of the theory of allometric
scaling, which attempts to explain the relationship between
body size and metabolic rate.
Different studies use different definitions of a network, and
the authors optimise different cost functions. For example,
Durand (Durand, 2006, 2007) considers the optimal geometry
and the relationship between the local geometry and the local
topology of hydraulic networks whose currents derive from
a potential, explicitly analogous to electrical networks, that
are embedded in an ambient space. In contrast, Banavar
et al. (2000a, b, 2002, 2010) propose a more abstract model
where the graph is not assumed to be embedded in a target
space, and the currents through the nodes are not explicitly
constrained to derive from a potential difference.
A very general observation at the heart of the analysis by
Banavar and colleagues is that any efficient flow pattern
must be such that at every point, the flow moves materials
away from the source. In other words, although there may
be loops in the networks they consider, optimally efficient
flows always transport materials in a directed manner. This
feature of ‘efficient’ material flows is common to many definitions of ‘efficient’ (Sherman, 1981; Maritan et al., 1996; West
et al., 1997, 1999a, 2002; Banavar et al., 1999, 2000a, b, 2002,
2010; Dreyer, 2001; Dreyer and Puzio, 2001; Colizza et al.,
2004; Rinaldo et al., 2004; West and Brown, 2004; Durand,
2006, 2007; Bernot et al., 2008; Savage et al., 2008; Corson,
2010; Dodds, 2010; Katifori et al., 2010), and it is inevitable
when the flows are driven by differences in potential.
Banavar and colleagues abstract approach enables the
construction of formal proofs concerning optimal networks,
but the proper physical interpretation of those results is somewhat elusive (Bohn and Magnasco, 2007). A different approach,
taken by West and colleagues builds on the legacy of Cecil D.
Murray, and the principle of minimum work (Murray, 1926;
Sherman, 1981; West et al., 1997, 1999b, 2002; West and
Brown, 2004; Savage et al., 2008). Fluid flow is essential to
most biological transport networks, and so cost functions
that reflect the energy required to overcome viscous drag are
of particular biological significance. Murray observed that
vascular networks represent an optimal or near optimal
compromise between conflicting costs, as the work required
to overcome viscous drag is much smaller in large vessels,
but this benefit of thickening is offset by a cost, and as a simplifying assumption it is reasonable to assume that the metabolic
cost of building and maintaining a vessel is proportional to its
volume. The optimal arrangement is when the cube of the
radius of the parent vessel equals the sum of the cubes of the
radii of the daughters (Murray’s law). Actual vascular systems
approximately follow Murray’s law (Sherman, 1981; Sherman
et al., 1989; McCulloh et al., 2003; Kassab, 2006; Savage et al.,
2008), but it is worth noting that significant deviations from
Murray’s law can result in only modest increase in the amount
of energy required to overcome viscous drag (Sherman et al.,
1989; Truskey et al., 2010).
Fluctuating demand, robustness and loops
Although vascular networks are frequently depicted as
branching trees (Bernot et al., 2008; Pries et al., 2009), many
natural and almost all man made networks contain loops.
Street plans are full of loops, most fungal networks contain
loops (Bebber et al., 2007a; Fricker et al., 2007, 2008a, 2009;
Boddy et al., 2009, 2010), as do retinal vasculatures (Fruttiger,
2002), and the veins of many leaves contain recursively nested
sets of loops (Roth-Nebelsick et al., 2001; Durand, 2006; Sack
and Holbrook, 2006; Corson et al., 2009; Corson, 2010; Katifori
et al., 2010). Recent theoretical analyses indicate that if
a network is attacked, or subject to fluctuating loads, the
optimal form is no longer a branching tree but will contain
loops (Corson et al., 2009; Corson, 2010; Katifori et al., 2010;
Katifori and Magnasco, 2011).
Optimisation under damage to links implies the formation
of loops almost by definition, as if there were only one route
connecting the source and a given sink, an infinite amount
of power would be dissipated when that route is cut. Robustness to damage can be conferred by a (topologically
minimum) ring joining the outermost nodes (Roth-Nebelsick
et al., 2001), and more generally it is well known that redundant links can confer a degree of robustness to a transport
network (Roth-Nebelsick et al., 2001; Rinaldo et al., 2004; Sack
and Holbrook, 2006; Fricker et al., 2007, 2009; Barthelemy,
2010). Plants and fungi are under constant attack, from the
elements as well as pathogens and a wide variety of grazing
animals (Roth-Nebelsick et al., 2001; Sack and Holbrook,
2006; Rotheray et al., 2008; Boddy et al., 2010; Crowther et al.,
2011a, b, c, in press). If fungal networks were branching trees,
severing any branch would disconnect the network. Likewise,
if the leaf vascular network was treelike, damage to any vein
would result in the death of all the leaf sections downstream
from that vein. The value of redundant links is therefore quite
clear, but optimality under robustness to damage can produce
hierarchical, recursively nested loops (Katifori et al., 2010;
Katifori and Magnasco, 2011), as can be found in actual leaf
venation networks (Roth-Nebelsick et al., 2001; Sack and
Holbrook, 2006).
Katifori et al. (2010, 2011) and Corson et al. (2009, 2010) also
show the importance of fluctuating demand for optimal transport networks. Many definitions of optimality yield treelike
structures, with a single path connecting any two points
24 L. Heaton et al.
(Sherman, 1981; Banavar et al., 1999, 2000a, b; Durand, 2006,
2007; Bohn and Magnasco, 2007; Bernot et al., 2008). In this
light, the many loops found in leaf venation networks, fungal
networks or vascular networks could be interpreted as
a compromise between transport efficiency and other requirements, such as tolerance to damage. However, Katifori et al.
and Corson et al. show that the optimality of branching trees
is contingent on the assumption of a stationary flow through
the network. By contrast, they found that optimisation under
a varying load leads can lead to the formation of dense, recursively looped structures (Corson et al., 2009, 2010; Katifori et al.,
2010; Katifori and Magnasco, 2011). More specifically, when
time variations or fluctuations are allowed for, the resulting
optimal structures contain loops, although they do share the
hierarchical organisation that is characteristic of treelike
optimal networks.
This result is biologically very significant, as in general
biological transport networks operate in the face of considerable spatiotemporal irregularities. As fungal networks grow
and the supporting mycelium matures, different parts of
the growing margin will need to be supplied with resources
at different times. If fungal networks have indeed evolved
to maximise transport efficiency, they should be optimal in
relation to a history of transport demands, and we should
not necessarily expect that at any instant the network is
the best way of linking the sites of resource uptake with
the sites of resource demand. Nevertheless, we note that
fungal transport networks have unusual features compared
to the preceding models of networks for the delivery of nutrients. The fungal network is both a transport system and the
organism itself. Fungal networks are vastly more dynamic
than vascular networks in plants and humans and it seems
that fungi use their networked state to process their environment, possibly using their fluid based nature to rapidly
couple behaviour even in disparate parts of themselves.
This type of analysis has strong parallels with the conceptual
ideas set out by Rayner two decades ago (Rayner, 1991;
Rayner et al., 1994, 1999).
10. Future developments
Characterisation of mycelial networks is still in its infancy.
However, the network approach provides a way of quantifying
and analysing complex fungal systems in detail, and also
makes it possible to link measurements in laboratory microcosms to observations of networks in the field. The simplest
models predicting transport through such networks are based
on shortest path considerations through the weighted
network and are relatively straightforward to calculate, but
only capture part of the experimentally determined transport
behaviour. Models that include parallel-flow pathways
coupled to the empirically-measured growth of the network
improve the match between simulation and experiment
significantly and explain several previously challenging
empirical observations. The next conceptual advance will be
to identify the rules that allow the network iteratively to refine
its structure and transport behaviour to yield the network
architectures observed. It is conceivable that the identification
of such rules will allow development of generic “fungal colony
optimisation” (Hanson et al., 2006; Xu et al., 2009) algorithms
similar to those that have evolved from the study of ant colony
foraging patterns (Dorigo et al., 1999) or based on Physarum
(Tero et al., 2006, 2007, 2008; Nakagaki et al., 2007; Watanabe
et al., 2011).
Even at this stage, some common features of biological
network formation seem to emerge. Fungal networks are constructed by local iterative developmental processes rather
than predetermined blueprints or centralised control, with
growth involving over-production of links and nodes, followed by selective pruning of some links and reinforcement
of others. Such a process mimics the process of Darwinian
evolution in which natural selection removes less fit offspring.
This ‘Darwinian network model’ may be applicable to other
biological systems, including foraging ant trails, Physarum,
axon development and angiogenesis, and may represent a
generalised model for growth of physical biological networks.
Based on the ant colony and Physarum models, we might
expect the generic ingredients in such a model will involve
a non-linear positive reinforcement term related to the local
flux and a linear decay term. Notably this model differs from
other models of weighted network evolution that only incorporate differential strengthening of links, i.e., ‘the busiest
get busier’, rather than additional differential weakening
and loss that is the hallmark of evolution by natural selection.
However, the model has parallels with the selective link
removal model proposed for unweighted networks (Salathe
et al., 2005). In infrastructure networks where costs are associated with creation and maintenance of links, where links
differ in some measure of fitness, and where material can be
recycled, such a Darwinian model may be applicable. In practical terms such a process may also be witnessed in the evolution of real infrastructure networks, such as British railways
following the Beeching reviews in the early 60’s (British
Transport Commission, 1963; British Railways Board, 1965).
In these reviews, the flux along various routes was measured
and routes with too low a level of traffic, mainly branch lines,
were targeted for closure. At the same time, major routes were
strengthened to cope with the expected sourceesink relationships for both passenger and freight traffic. Interestingly, the
reports focussed on efficiency rather than any explicit consideration of resilience, which may explain the sensitivity of the
current network to disruption.
A second feature of interest emerging, particularly through
consideration of the Physarum and fungal networks, is the
extent that coupled flows may contain global information.
Networks involving physical flows obey continuity equations
and are therefore intrinsically coupled across the network.
This automatically means that increasing the flow in one
part of the network will lead to reductions elsewhere, even
though the local conditions in the distal region remain the
same. Thus each part of the network is influenced by and
can influence the whole network, but without any global
assessment of behaviour. Useful properties of the network
may emerge from the interaction between the local update
rules governing topology and flows without the need for
long-distance communication or calculation of aggregate
properties of the network. It is this coupling in the Physarum
model that allows the network to resolve from a fine mesh
into a quasi-optimal solution (Tero et al., 2006, 2007, 2008;
Analysis of fungal networks 25
Nakagaki et al., 2007). Furthermore, the computational overhead for such self-organised networks scales well with the
number of additional nodes.
Set against this progress are some equally difficult challenges. The transition to three dimensions, particularly in
realistic soil or wood microcosms, is immensely problematic
for the vast majority of imaging approaches. There is potential
to record the micro-structure of a porous soil system using
high-resolution X-ray tomography and then predict the
behaviour of different fungi using modelling approaches
(Blair et al., 2007; Pajor et al., 2010), but there is currently not
sufficient contrast to resolve the actual fungal distribution
within the soil. Likewise, the observation that fungi can take
up and translocate quantum dots (Whiteside et al., 2009),
and the increasing number of species that can now express
fluorescent proteins (Lorang et al., 2001; Czymmek et al.,
2004; Leroch et al., 2011) coupled with confocal or multiphoton imaging facilitate 3-D or 4-D data collection from
living systems (Czymmek, 2005), but only in relatively translucent media to a depth of around 100 mm.
Acknowledgements
Research in the authors’ laboratories has been supported by
BBSRC (43/P19284), NERC (GR3/12946 & NER/A/S/2002/882),
EPSRC (GR/S63090/01), EU Framework 6 (STREP No. 12999),
Oxford University Research Infrastructure Fund and the
University Dunston Bequest. We thank A. Ashford, K. Burton,
P.R. Darrah, D.P. Donnelly, D. Eastwood, J. Efstathiou, J. Hynes,
N. Johnson, E. Lopez, P. Maini, F. Reed-Tsochas, M. Tlalka, G.M.
Tordoff, S.C. Watkinson and members of CABDyN for stimulating discussions.
references
Banavar, J.R., Colaiori, F., Flammini, A., Maritan, A., Rinaldo, A.,
2000a. Topology of the fittest transportation network. Phys.
Rev. Lett. 84, 4745e4748.
Banavar, J.R., Damuth, J., Maritan, A., Rinaldo, A., 2002. Supplydemand balance and metabolic scaling. PNAS 99,
10506e10509.
Banavar, J.R., Maritan, A., Rinaldo, A., 1999. Size and form in
efficient transportation networks. Nature 399, 130e132.
Banavar, J.R., Maritan, A., Rinaldo, A., 2000b. Scaling e rivers,
blood and transportation networks e reply. Nature 408, 160.
Banavar, J.R., Moses, M.E., Brown, J.H., Damuth, J., Rinaldo, A.,
Sibly, R.M., Maritan, A., 2010. A general basis for quarterpower scaling in animals. PNAS 107, 15816e15820.
Barrat, A., Barthelemy, M., Vespignani, A., 2005. The effects of
spatial constraints on the evolution of weighted complex
networks. J. Stat. Mech. P05003.
Barry, D., Chan, C., Williams, G., 2009. Morphological quantification of filamentous fungal development using membrane
immobilization and automatic image analysis. J. Ind. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 36, 787e800.
Barry, D.J., Williams, G.A., 2011. Microscopic characterisation of
filamentous microbes: towards fully automated morphological
quantification through image analysis. J. Microsc. 244, 1e20.
Barthelemy, M., 2010. Spatial networks. Phys. Rep. 499, 1e101.
Bebber, D.P., Hynes, J., Darrah, P.R., Boddy, L., Fricker, M.D., 2007a.
Biological solutions to transport network design. Proc. R. Soc.
B 274, 2307e2315.
Bebber, D.P., Tlalka, M., Hynes, J., Darrah, P.R., Ashford, A.,
Watkinson, S.C., Boddy, L., Fricker, M.D., 2007b. Imaging
complex nutrient dynamics in mycelial networks. In: Gadd, G.,
Watkinson, S.C., Dyer, P. (Eds.), Fungi in the Environment.
Cambridge University Press, pp. 3e21.
Beiler, K.J., Durall, D.M., Simard, S.W., Maxwell, S.A.,
Kretzer, A.M., 2010. Architecture of the wood-wide web: Rhizopogon spp. genets link multiple Douglas-fir cohorts. New
Phytol. 185, 543e553.
Bernot, M., Caselles, V., Morel, J.M., 2008. Optimal Transportation
Networks: Models and Theory. Springer-Verlag, Berlin.
Blair, J.M., Falconer, R.E., Milne, A.C., Young, I.M., Crawford, J.W.,
2007. Modeling three-dimensional microstructure in heterogeneous media. Soil Sci. Soc. Am. J. 71, 1807e1812.
Boddy, L., 1999. Saprotrophic cord-forming fungi: meeting the
challenge of heterogeneous environments. Mycologia 91, 13e32.
Boddy, L., Donnelly, D.P., 2008. Fractal geometry and microorganisms in the environment. In: Senesi, N., Wilkinson, K.J.
(Eds.), Biophysical Chemistry of Fractal Structures and
Processes in Environmental Systems. John Wiley, Chichester,
UK, pp. 239e272.
Boddy, L., Hynes, J., Bebber, D.P., Fricker, M.D., 2009. Saprotrophic
cord systems: dispersal mechanisms in space and time.
Mycoscience 50, 9e19.
Boddy, L., Jones, T.H., 2007. Mycelial responses in heterogeneous
environments: parallels with macroorganisms. In: Gadd, G.,
Watkinson, S.C., Dyer, P. (Eds.), Fungi in the Environment.
Cambridge University Press, pp. 112e158.
Boddy, L., Wood, J., Redman, E., Hynes, J., Fricker, M.D., 2010.
Fungal network responses to grazing. Fungal Genet. Biol. 47,
522e530.
Bohn, S., Magnasco, M.O., 2007. Structure, scaling, and phase
transition in the optimal transport network. Phys. Rev. Lett.
98, 088702.
Boswell, G.P., Jacobs, H., Davidson, F.A., Gadd, G.M., Ritz, K., 2002.
Functional consequences of nutrient translocation in mycelial
fungi. J. Theor. Biol. 217, 459e477.
Boswell, G.P., Jacobs, H., Davidson, F.A., Gadd, G.M., Ritz, K., 2003.
Growth and function of fungal mycelia in heterogeneous
environments. Bull. Math. Biol. 65, 447e477.
Boswell, G.P., Jacobs, H., Ritz, K., Gadd, G.M., Davidson, F.A., 2007.
The development of fungal networks in complex environments. Bull. Math. Biol. 69, 605e634.
Bretherton, S., Tordoff, G.M., Jones, T.H., Boddy, L., 2006.
Compensatory growth of Phanerochaete velutina mycelial
systems grazed by Folsomia candida (Collembola). FEMS
Microbiol. Ecol. 58, 33e40.
British Railways Board, 1965. The Development of The Major
Railway Trunk Routes. British Railways Board.
British Transport Commission, 1963. The Reshaping of British
Railways e Part 1: Report. Her Majesty’s Stationery Office.
Buhl, J., Gautrais, J., Sole, R.V., Kuntz, P., Valverde, S.,
Deneubourg, J.L., Theraulaz, G., 2004. Efficiency and robustness in ant networks of galleries. Eur. Phys. J. B 42, 123e129.
Cairney, J.W.G., 1992. Translocation of solutes in ectomycorrhizal
and saprotrophic rhizomorphs. Mycol. Res. 96, 135e141.
Cairney, J.W.G., 2005. Basidiomycete mycelia in forest soils:
dimensions, dynamics and roles in nutrient distribution. Mycol. Res. 109, 7e20.
Cardillo, A., Scellato, S., Latora, V., Porta, S., 2006. Structural
properties of planar graphs of urban street patterns. Phys. Rev.
E 73, 066107.
Colizza, V., Banavar, J.R., Maritan, A., Rinaldo, A., 2004. Network
structures from selection principles. Phys. Rev. Lett. 92,
198701.
26 L. Heaton et al.
Corson, F., 2010. Fluctuations and redundancy in optimal transport networks. Phys. Rev. Lett. 104, 048703.
Corson, F., Adda-Bedia, M., Boudaoud, A., 2009. In silico leaf
venation networks: growth and reorganization driven by
mechanical forces. J. Theor. Biol. 259, 440e448.
Crawford, J.W., Ritz, K., Young, I.M., 1993. Quantification of fungal
morphology, gaseous transport and microbial dynamics in
soil e an integrated framework utilizing fractal geometry.
Geoderma 56, 157e172.
Crowther, T.W., Boddy, L., Jones, T.H., 2011a. Outcomes of fungal
interactions are determined by soil invertebrate grazers. Ecol.
Lett. 14, 1134e1142.
Crowther, T.W., Boddy, L., Jones, T.H., 2011b. Species-specific
effects of soil fauna on fungal foraging and decomposition.
Oecologia 167, 535e545.
Crowther, T.W., Jones, T.H., Boddy, L., 2011c. Species-specific
effects of grazing invertebrates on mycelial emergence and
growth from woody resources into soil. Fungal Ecol. 4, 333e341.
Crowther T.W., Jones T.H., Boddy L. Interactions between saprotrophic basidiomycete mycelia and mycophagous soil fauna.
Mycology, in press, doi:10.1080/21501203.2012.656723.
Czymmek, K.J., 2005. Exploring fungal activity with confocal and
multiphoton microscopy. In: Dighton, J., White, J.F.,
Oudemans, P. (Eds.), The Fungal Community: Its Organisation
and Role in the Ecosystem, pp. 307e330.
Czymmek, K.J., Bourett, T.M., Howard, R.J., 2004. Fluorescent
protein probes in fungi. Methods Microbiol. 34, 27e62.
Darrah, P.R., Tlalka, M., Ashford, A., Watkinson, S.C.,
Fricker, M.D., 2006. The vacuole system is a significant intracellular pathway for longitudinal solute transport in basidiomycete fungi. Eukaryot. Cell 5, 1111e1125.
Davidson, F.A., Olsson, S., 2000. Translocation induced outgrowth
of fungi in nutrient-free environments. J. Theor. Biol. 205,
73e84.
Dodds, P.S., 2010. Optimal form of branching supply and collection networks. Phys. Rev. Lett. 104, 048702.
Dorigo, M., Di Caro, G., Gambardella, L.M., 1999. Ant algorithms
for discrete optimization. Artif. Life 5, 137e172.
Dreyer, O., 2001. Allometric scaling and central source systems.
Phys. Rev. Lett. 8703, 038101.
Dreyer, O., Puzio, R., 2001. Allometric scaling in animals and
plants. J. Math. Biol. 43, 144e156.
Durand, M., 2006. Architecture of optimal transport networks.
Phys. Rev. E 73, 016116.
Durand, M., 2007. Structure of optimal transport networks subject
to a global constraint. Phys. Rev. Lett. 98, 088701.
Falconer, R.E., Bown, J.L., White, N.A., Crawford, J.W., 2005.
Biomass recycling and the origin of phenotype in fungal
mycelia. Proc. R. Soc. B 272, 1727e1734.
Falconer, R.E., Bown, J.L., White, N.A., Crawford, J.W., 2007.
Biomass recycling: a key to efficient foraging by fungal
colonies. Oikos 116, 1558e1568.
Frangi, A., Niessen, W., Vincken, K., Viergever, M., 1998. Multiscale
vessel enhancement filtering. In: Wells, W., Colchester, A.,
Delp, S. (Eds.), Medical Image Computing and Computerassisted Intervention. Springer, Berlin/Heidelberg, pp. 130e137.
Fricker, M., Boddy, L., Nakagaki, T., Bebber, D.P., 2009. Adaptive
biological networks. In: Gross, T., Sayama, H. (Eds.), Adaptive
Networks: Theory, Models and Applications. Springer, pp. 51e70.
Fricker, M.D., Bebber, D.P., Boddy, L., 2008a. Mycelial networks:
structure and dynamics. In: Boddy, L., Franklin, J.C., van
West, P. (Eds.), Ecology of Saprotrophic Basidiomycetes.
Academic Press, Amsterdam, pp. 3e18.
Fricker, M.D., Boddy, L., Bebber, D.P., 2007. Network organisation
of mycelial fungi. In: Howard, R.J., Gow, N.A.R. (Eds.), The
Mycota. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, pp. 309e330.
Fricker, M.D., Lee, J.A., Bebber, D.P., Tlalka, M., Hynes, J.,
Darrah, P.R., Watkinson, S.C., Boddy, L., 2008b. Imaging
complex nutrient dynamics in mycelial networks. J. Microsc.
231, 317e331.
Fricker, M.D., Lee, J.A., Boddy, L., Bebber, D.P., 2008c. The interplay
between structure and function in fungal networks.
Topologica 1.
Fruttiger, M.A., 2002. Development of the mouse retinal vasculature: angiogenesis versus vasculogenesis. Invest. Ophthalmol.
Vis. Sci. 43, 522e527.
Gastner, M.T., Newman, M.E.J., 2006a. Optimal design of spatial
distribution networks. Phys. Rev. E 74, 016117.
Gastner, M.T., Newman, M.E.J., 2006b. Shape and efficiency in
spatial distribution networks. J. Stat. Mech., P01015.
Haggett, P., Chorley, R.J., 1969. Network Analysis in Geography.
Arnold, London.
Hanson, K.L., Nicolau, D.V., Filipponi, L., Wang, L., Lee, A.P., 2006.
Fungi use efficient algorithms for the exploration of microfluidic networks. Small 2, 1212e1220.
Harold, F.M., 2002. Force and compliance: rethinking morphogenesis in walled cells. Fungal Genet. Biol. 37, 271e282.
Harold, S., Tordoff, G.M., Jones, T.H., Boddy, L., 2005. Mycelial
responses of Hypholoma fasciculare to collembola grazing:
effect of inoculum age, nutrient status and resource quality.
Mycol. Res. 109, 927e935.
Harris, S.D., 2008. Branching of fungal hyphae: regulation,
mechanisms and comparison with other branching systems.
Mycologia 100, 823e832.
Heaton, L.L.M., Lopez, E., Maini, P.K., Fricker, M.D., Jones, N.S., 
2010. Growth-induced mass flows in fungal networks. Proc. R.
Soc. B 277, 3265e3274.
Heaton L.L.M., Lopez E., Maini P.K., Fricker M.D., Jones N.S. 
Advection, diffusion and delivery over a network. Phys. Rev. E,
submitted for publication.
Held, M., Edwards, C., Nicolau, D.V., 2011. Probing the growth
dynamics of Neurospora crassa with microfluidic structures.
Fungal Biol. 115, 493e505.
Hitchcock, D., Glasbey, C.A., Ritz, K., 1996. Image analysis of
space-filling by networks: application to a fungal mycelium.
Biotechnol. Tech. 10, 205e210.
Jedd, G., 2011. Fungal evoedevo: organelles and multicellular
complexity. Trends Cell Biol. 21, 12e19.
Jennings, D.H., 1987. Translocation of solutes in fungi. Biol. Rev.
62, 215e243.
Kamiya, A., Bukhari, R., Togawa, T., 1984. Adaptive regulation of
wall shear stress optimizing vascular tree function. Bull. Math.
Biol. 46, H14eH21.
Kassab, G.S., 2006. Scaling laws of vascular trees: of form and
function. Am. J. Physiol. Heart Circ. Physiol. 290, H894eH903.
Katifori, E., Magnasco, M.O., 2011. Quantifying Loopy Network
Architecture. arXiv:1110.1412v1.
Katifori, E., Szollosi, G.J., Magnasco, M.O., 2010. Damage and
fluctuations induce loops in optimal transport networks. Phys.
Rev. Lett. 104, 048704.
Knutsson, H., Westin, C.-F., Andersson, M., 2011. Representing
local structure using tensors II. In: Heyden, A., Kahl, F. (Eds.),
Image Analysis. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 6688
Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, pp. 545e556.
Kohlmeier, S., Smits, T.H.M., Ford, R.M., Keel, C., Harms, H.,
Wick, L.Y., 2005. Taking the fungal highway: Mobilization of
pollutant-degrading bacteria by fungi. Environ. Sci. Technol.
39, 4640e4646.
Kovesi, P.D., 1999. Image features from phase congruency. Videre
1, 1e26.
Lamour, A., Termorshuizen, A.J., Volker, D., Jeger, M.J., 2007.
Network formation by rhizomorphs of Armillaria lutea in
natural soil: their description and ecological significance.
FEMS Microbiol. Ecol. 62, 222e232.
Latora, V., Marchiori, M., 2001. Efficient behavior of small-world
networks. Phys. Rev. Lett. 87, 198701.
Analysis of fungal networks 27
Latora, V., Marchiori, M., 2003. Economic small-world behavior in
weighted networks. Eur. Phys. J. B 32, 249e263.
Latora, V., Marchiori, M., 2007. A measure of centrality based on
network efficiency. New J. Phys. 9, 188.
Leroch, M., Mernke, D., Koppenhoefer, D., Schneider, P.,
Mosbach, A., Doehlemann, G., Hahn, M., 2011. Living colors in
the Gray mold pathogen Botrytis cinerea: codon-optimized
genes encoding green fluorescent protein and mCherry, which
exhibit bright fluorescence. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 77,
2887e2897.
Lew, R., Levina, N., Walker, S., Garrill, A., 2004. Turgor regulation
in hyphal organisms. Fungal Genet. Biol. 41, 1007e1015.
Lew, R.R., 2005. Mass flow and pressure-driven hyphal extension
in Neurospora crassa. Microbiology 151, 2685e2692.
Lew, R.R., 2011. How does a hypha grow? The biophysics of
pressurized growth in fungi. Nature Rev. Microbiol. 9, 509e518.
Lindahl, B., Finlay, R., Olsson, S., 2001. Simultaneous, bidirectional translocation of 32P and 33P between wood blocks
connected by mycelial cords of Hypholoma fasciculare. New
Phytol. 150, 189e194.
Lorang, J.M., Tuori, R.P., Martinez, J.P., Sawyer, T.L., Redman, R.S.,
Rollins, J.A., Wolpert, T.J., Johnson, K.B., Rodriguez, R.J.,
Dickman, M.B., Ciuffetti, L.M., 2001. Green fluorescent protein
is lighting up fungal biology. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 67,
1987e1994.
Maritan, A., Colaiori, F., Flammini, A., Cieplak, M., Banavar, J.R.,
1996. Universality classes of optimal channel networks.
Science 272, 984e986.
McCulloh, K.A., Sperry, J.S., Adler, F.R., 2003. Water transport in
plants obeys Murray’s law. Nature 421, 939e942.
Meijering, E., Jacob, M., Sarria, J.C.F., Steiner, P., Hirling, H.,
Unser, M., 2004. Design and validation of a tool for neurite
tracing and analysis in fluorescence microscopy images. Cytometry 58A, 167e176.
Money, N.P., 1990. Measurement of hyphal turgor. Exp. Mycol. 14,
416e425.
Money, N.P., 1997. Wishful thinking of turgor revisited: the
mechanics of fungal growth. Fungal Genet. Biol. 21, 173e187.
Money, N.P., 2008. Insights on the mechanics of hyphal growth.
Fungal Biol. Rev. 22, 71e76.
Murray, C.D., 1926. The physiological principle of minimum work.
I. The vascular system and the cost of blood volume. PNAS 12,
207e214.
Nakagaki, T., Iima, M., Ueda, T., Nishiura, Y., Saigusa, T., Tero, A.,
Kobayashi, R., Showalter, K., 2007. Minimum-risk path finding
by an adaptive amoebal network. Phys. Rev. Lett. 99, 068104.
Obara, B., Fricker, M.D., Gavaghan, D., Grau, V., 2012 .Jan 27..
Contrast-independent curvilinear structure detection in
biomedical images. IEEE Trans Image Process [Epub ahead of
print].
Obara, B., Fricker, M.D., Gavaghan, D., Grau, V., 2012. Contrastindependent Junction Detection of Branching Points in
Network-like Structures. SPIE Medical Imaging, San Diego, CA.
Obara B., Grau V., Fricker M.D. Bioimage informatics approaches
for extraction and analysis of fungal networks. Bioinformatics,
submitted for publication.
Olsson, S., 2001. Colonial growth of fungi. In: Howard, R.J.,
Gow, N.A.R. (Eds.), Biology of the Fungal Cell. Springer,
pp. 125e141.
Olsson, S., Gray, S.N., 1998. Patterns and dynamics of 32P-phosphate and labelled 2-aminoisobutyric acid (14C-AIB) translocation in intact basidiomycete mycelia. FEMS Microbiol. Ecol.
26, 109e120.
Pajor, R., Falconer, R., Hapca, S., Otten, W., 2010. Modelling and
quantifying the effect of heterogeneity in soil physical conditions on fungal growth. Biogeosciences 7, 3731e3740.
Pries, A.R., Cornelissen, A.J.M., Sloot, A.A., Hinkeldey, M.,
Dreher, M.R., Hopfner, M., Dewhirst, M.W., Secomb, T.W., €
Papin, J.A., 2009. Structural adaptation and heterogeneity of
normal and tumor microvascular networks. PLoS Comput.
Biol. 5, e1000394.
Ramos-Garcia, S.L., Roberson, R.W., Freitag, M., BartnickiGarcia, S., Mourino-P ~ erez, R.R., 2009. Cytoplasmic bulk flow 
propels nuclei in mature hyphae of Neurospora crassa. Eukaryot. Cell 8, 1880e1890.
Rayner, A.D.M., 1991. The challenge of the individualistic
mycelium. Mycologia 83, 48e71.
Rayner, A.D.M., Griffith, G.S., Ainsworth, A.M., 1994. Mycelial
interconnectedness. In: Gow, N.A.R., Gadd, G.M. (Eds.), The
Growing Fungus. Chapman and Hall, London, pp. 21e40.
Rayner, A.D.M., Powell, K.A., Thompson, W., Jennings, D.H., 1985.
Morphogenesis of Vegetative Organs, Developmental Biology
of Higher Fungi. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
249e279.
Rayner, A.D.M., Watkins, Z.R., Beeching, J.R., 1999. Self-integration e an emerging concept from the fungal mycelium. In:
Gow, N.A.R., Robson, G.D., Gadd, G.M. (Eds.), The Fungal
Colony. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, pp. 1e24.
Read, N.D., Fleißner, A., Roca, G.M., Glass, N.L., 2010. Hyphal
fusion. In: Borkovich, K.A., Ebbole, D. (Eds.), Cellular and
Molecular Biology of Filamentous Fungi. American Society of
Microbiology, pp. 260e273.
Read, N.D., Lichius, A., Shoji, J.Y., Goryachev, A.B., 2009. Self-signalling and self-fusion in filamentous fungi. Curr. Opin. Microbiol. 12, 608e615.
Rinaldo, A., Banavar, J.R., Colizza, V., Maritan, A., 2004. On
network form and function. Physica A 340, 749e755.
Ritz, K., Millar, S.M., Crawford, J.W., 1996. Detailed visualisation of
hyphal distribution in fungal mycelia growing in heterogeneous nutritional environments. J. Microbiol. Methods 25,
23e28.
Roth-Nebelsick, A., Uhl, D., Mosbrugger, V., Kerp, H., 2001.
Evolution and function of leaf venation architecture: a review.
Ann. Bot. 87, 553e566.
Rotheray, T.D., Jones, T.H., Fricker, M.D., Boddy, L., 2008. Grazing
alters network architecture during interspecific mycelial
interactions. Fungal Ecol. 1, 124e132.
Sack, L., Holbrook, N.M., 2006. Leaf hydraulics. Annu. Rev. Plant
Biol. 57, 361e381.
Salathe, M., May, R.M., Bonhoeffer, S., 2005. The evolution of
network topology by selective removal. J. R. Soc. Interface 2,
533e536.
Savage, V.M., Deeds, E.J., Fontana, W., 2008. Sizing up allometric
scaling theory. PLoS Comput. Biol. 4, e1000171.
Selosse, M.A., Richard, F., He, X.H., Simard, S.W., 2006. Mycorrhizal networks: des liaisons dangereuses? Trends Ecol. Evol.
21, 621e628.
Sherman, T.F., 1981. On connecting large vessels to small: the
meaning of Murray’s law. J. Gen. Physiol. 78, 431e453.
Sherman, T.F., Popel, A.S., Koller, A., Johnson, P.C., 1989. The cost
of departure from optimal radii in microvascular networks. J.
Theor. Biol. 136, 245e265.
Simard, S.W., Beiler, K.J., Bingham, M.A., Deslippe, J.R., Philip, L.J.,
Teste, F.P., 2012. Mycorrhizal networks: mechanisms, ecology
and modelling. Fungal Biol. Rev. 26.
Simard, S.W., Durall, D.M., 2004. Mycorrhizal networks: a review
of their extent, function, and importance. Can. J. Bot. 82,
1140e1165.
Smith, M.L., Bruhn, J.N., Anderson, J.B., 1992. The fungus Armillaria bulbosa is among the largest and oldest living organisms.
Nature 356, 428e431.
Southworth, D., He, X.H., Swenson, W., Bledsoe, C.S.,
Horwath, W.R., 2005. Application of network theory to potential mycorrhizal networks. Mycorrhiza 15, 589e595.
Steinberg, G., 2007. Hyphal growth: a tale of motors, lipids, and
the Spitzenkorper. Eukaryot. Cell 6, 351e360.
28 L. Heaton et al.
Stumpf, M.P.H., Wiuf, C., May, R.M., 2005. Subnets of scale-free
networks are not scale-free: sampling properties of networks.
PNAS 102, 4221e4224.
Suelmann, R., Fischer, R., 2000. Nuclear migration in fungi e
different motors at work. Res. Microbiol. 151, 247e254.
Tero, A., Kobayashi, R., Nakagaki, T., 2006. Physarum solver:
a biologically inspired method of road-network navigation.
Physica A 363, 115e119.
Tero, A., Kobayashi, R., Nakagaki, T., 2007. A mathematical model
for adaptive transport network in path finding by true slime
mold. J. Theor. Biol. 244, 553e564.
Tero, A., Yumiki, K., Kobayashi, R., Saigusa, T., Nakagaki, T., 2008.
Flow-network adaptation in Physarum amoebae. Theory Biosci.
127, 89e94.
Tlalka, M., Bebber, D., Darrah, P.R., Watkinson, S.C., Fricker, M.D.,
2007. Emergence of self-organised oscillatory domains in
fungal mycelia. Fungal Genet. Biol. 44, 1085e1095.
Tlalka, M., Bebber, D.P., Darrah, P.R., Watkinson, S.C.,
Fricker, M.D., 2008. Quantifying dynamic resource allocation
illuminates foraging strategy in Phanerochaete velutina. Fungal
Genet. Biol. 45, 1111e1121.
Tlalka, M., Watkinson, S.C., Darrah, P.R., Fricker, M.D., 2002.
Continuous imaging of amino-acid translocation in intact
mycelia of Phanerochaete velutina reveals rapid, pulsatile fluxes.
New Phytol. 153, 173e184.
Truskey, G.A., Yuan, F., Katz, D.F., 2010. Transport Phenomena in
Biological Systems. Pearson Prentice Hall, New Jersey.
Tucker, K.G., Kelly, T., Delgrazia, P., Thomas, C.R., 1992. Fullyautomatic measurement of mycelial morphology by image
analysis. Biotechnol. Prog. 8, 353e359.
Watanabe, S., Tero, A., Takamatsu, A., Nakagaki, T., 2011. Traffic
optimization in railroad networks using an algorithm
mimicking an amoeba-like organism, Physarum plasmodium.
Biosystems 105, 225e232.
Watkinson, S.C., 1984. Inhibition of growth and development of
Serpula lacrymans by the non-metabolized amino-acid analog
alpha-aminoisobutyric-acid. FEMS Microbiol. Lett. 24, 247e250.
Wells, J.M., Boddy, L., 1995. Effect of temperature on wood decay
and translocation of soil-derived phosphorus in mycelial cord
systems. New Phytol. 129, 289e297.
Wells, J.M., Boddy, L., Evans, R., 1995. Carbon translocation in
mycelial cord systems of Phanerochaete velutina (Dc, Pers) Parmasto. New Phytol. 129, 467e476.
West, G.B., Brown, J.H., 2004. Life’s universal scaling laws. Phys.
Today 57, 36e42.
West, G.B., Brown, J.H., Enquist, B.J., 1997. A general model for the
origin of allometric scaling laws in biology. Science 276,
122e126.
West, G.B., Brown, J.H., Enquist, B.J., 1999a. The fourth dimension
of life: fractal geometry and allometric scaling of organisms.
Science 284, 1677e1679.
West, G.B., Brown, J.H., Enquist, B.J., 1999b. A general model for
the structure and allometry of plant vascular systems. Nature
400, 664e667.
West, G.B., Woodruff, W.H., Brown, J.H., 2002. Allometric scaling
of metabolic rate from molecules and mitochondria to cells
and mammals. PNAS 99, 2473e2478.
Whiteside, M.D., Treseder, K.K., Atsatt, P.R., 2009. The brighter
side of soils: quantum dots track organic nitrogen through
fungi and plants. Ecology 90, 100e108.
Whitfield, J., 2007. Fungal roles in soil ecology: underground
networking. Nature 449, 136e138.
Wick, L.Y., Furuno, S., Harms, H., 2010. Fungi as transport
vectors for contaminants and contaminant-degrading
bacteria. In: Timmis, K.N. (Ed.), Handbook of Hydrocarbon
and Lipid Microbiology. Springer Berlin, Heidelberg,
pp. 1555e1561.
Wood, J., Tordoff, G.M., Jones, T.H., Boddy, L., 2006. Reorganization of mycelial networks of Phanerochaete velutina in response
to new woody resources and collembola (Folsomia candida)
grazing. Mycol. Res. 110, 985e993.
Woolston, B.M., Schlagnhaufer, C., Wilkinson, J., Larsen, J., Shi, Z.,
Mayer, K.M., Walters, D.S., Curtis, W.R., Romaine, C.P., 2011.
Long-distance translocation of protein during morphogenesis
of the fruiting body in the filamentous fungus, Agaricus bisporus. PLoS ONE 6, e28412.
Xu, H., Falconer, R., Bradley, D., Crawford, J., 2009. FUNNet e
a novel biologically-inspired routing algorithm based on fungi.